# Review: React Basics

We're going to review some of the basics of React, and how to work with it. This
might feel rudimentary, but it's important that everyone's on the same page when
we start diving deeper into how React actually works under the hood!

To start, head to
[https://glitch.com/edit/#!/oak-pm-react-week-react-comfort](https://glitch.com/edit/#!/oak-pm-react-week-react-comfort)
and click Remix in the top right corner to fork your own website.

A quick note on language: throughout this post, we'll use "HTML element" to
refer to native browser elements, like `<p>` or `<div>`, and "React element" to
refer to the values returned by calling `React.createElement`. A "React
component" refers to a function that returns a valid React child (usually a
React element), or a class that extends `React.Component`.

## `React.createElement` and `ReactDOM.render`

To run React in the browser, you need at least two libraries: React, and
ReactDOM. React provides a suite of functions and classes for defining a tree of
"React elements", and how that tree should be updated over time. ReactDOM is
responsible for actually updating the browser DOM to keep it in sync with the
React tree.

We'll start by talking about `React`. In most React applications, we use JSX
syntax to define our React element tree. Under the hood, tools like `babel` or
`tsc` compile JSX to function calls. Specifically, something like:

```jsx
<p id="intro">This is the intro.</p>
```

Will be compiled to this:

```javascript
React.createElement("p", { id: "intro" }, "This is the intro");
```

`React.createElement` takes as arguments:

- The element's type, which can be a string HTML tag name (e.g. `"p"` or
  `"div"`), a function, or a class that extends `React.Component`
- The "props" to pass to the element, such as `id` in the above example. This is
  passed as a single object, mapping prop names to values.
- Finally, any number of child elements. Child elements can be any of:
  - `null`, `undefined`, or `false`. Elements with these values will not be
    rendered.
  - Any string (or other Javascript primitive value, which will be converted to
    a string)
  - Any React element (the result of calling `React.createElement`)

Now let's talk about `ReactDOM`. The primary entrypoint to `ReactDOM` for most
applications is `ReactDOM.render`, which takes two arguments:

- A React element. This element will be mounted as a child of the container HTML
  element
- A container HTML element. The React tree will be mounted within this HTML
  element.

Let's start by implementing a simple "Hello, World" page with `ReactDOM.render`
and `React.createElement`. In the inline `script` tag in your Glitch project,
implement the HelloWorld function so that it returns a React element with the
element type `"main"`. The `"main"` element should have two children:

- An `"h1"` type React element, containing the string "Hello, World!", with an
  `id` prop with the value `"heading1"`
- A `"p"` type React element, containing the string "Brought to you by React"

As an experiment, what happens if you call your `HelloWorld` function (we'll
also refer to functions like this, that return React elements, as "components")
and `console.log` the result?

Now, let's mount our React tree! Add a call to `ReactDOM.render` to the end of
your script, mounting an instance of your new `HelloWorld` component in the HTML
element with the id "container".

Click the Preview button in the bottom toolbar to see your new page!

## Adding JSX

We need to make two small changes to enable JSX in our script tags. First,
uncomment the script tag on line 17 that imports `@babel/standalone` from unpkg.
Then, add `type="text/babel"` to your inline script tag.

Now, let's rewrite our page with JSX. This is going to start looking more like
the React we know and love, but it's useful to keep in mind what our JSX is
actually doing. Each JSX "tag" is actually a call to `React.createElement`,
which means it's a **statement** that returns a React element.

## Hooks

React Hooks provide an interface for state management and side effects in your
React code. React components (e.g. `HelloWorld`) can track their own state and
execute their own side effects via hooks.

### State

Let's start by adding some very simple state to our app. We'll make a new
component, `Counter`. `Counter` should render a `p` tag containing the text
`Count: 0`, followed by two buttons, a plus button and a minus button. Now let's
place `Counter` in our `HelloWorld` component, between the `h1` and `p`
elements.

<details>
<summary>A few reminders about JSX</summary>

- Babel, the transpilation library that converts JSX to `React.createElement`,
  decides whether to treat the JSX element as an HTML tag name (e.g. `"p"`) or a
  component (e.g. `Counter`) based on whether the first letter is capitalized.
  This is why we always capitalize React component names, even when defining
  them as functions.
- When creating an element with no children, you can always write the tag in
  "self-closing" style. This looks like `<Counter />` for our `Counter`
  component.

</details>

Now we'll actually wire up our state. We'll do this by adding a function call to
`React.useState()` in our `Counter` component. It's helpful to think of hooks as
an escape hatch from your component definition and the render cycle;
`React.useState()` is a way to make a little pocket to store a value in, and
access it each time your component is rendered.

The call to `React.useState()` actually returns an array with two elements: the
current value in the pocket, and a function that takes a new value as an
argument. When the function is called, it will update the value in the pocket,
and then re-render your React component, so that it can return a new React
element with the updated value. It's common to use array destructuring to access
these return values:

```jsx focus=2
function Counter() {
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0);
  return <p>
```

Next, we want to actually use this `count` value in our rendered output. To do
so, we'll use curly braces to embed our Javascript expression (`count`) in our
JSX.

As an experiment, log the return value of `Counter` to the console. How does
Babel translate your embedded Javascript expression? What is the resulting
`children` prop in the `p` element?

Finally, let's hook up some state updates. We can do this by adding `onClick`
props to our buttons. Unlike in HTML, where the `onclick` attribute takes a
string that represents some Javascript code to execute, the `onClick` prop (and
other event handlers) in React receives a function, which is called with the
event as an argument. Again, we'll use JSX's curly brace syntax to embed a
Javascript expression. Here's an example that logs the event to the console:

```jsx
<button
  type="button"
  onClick={(event) => {
    console.log(event);
  }}
>
  Click here
</button>
```

Add an `onClick` prop to each button: the plus button should call `setCount`
with a value one higher than the current `count`, and the minus button should
call `setCount` with a value one lower than the current `count`. Now, you should
be able to update the value on the page by clicking the plus or minus buttons.

### Side effects and mutations

React render functions (either function components, like our `Counter`, or the
`render` method of a class component) have to be "pure functions". The notion of
pure functions comes from functional programming, a style of programming that
avoids side effects and mutations, and prioritizes thinking about programming as
a series of functions, or transformations, applied to data. In this paradigm, a
"pure" function is one with no side effects; it takes some data as an argument,
and through some set of transformations, produces some new data. Crucially, this
is _all_ a pure function can do; side effects, like logging or making network
requests, are not allowed.

Sometimes, though, we need to execute side effects in order for our application
to work! The remainder of the hooks provided by React deal largely with
supporting side effects and mutations.

The React docs cover
[The Effect hook](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-effect.html) in depth, and it's
worth reading through!
